# Transformer-From-Scratch

Implementation of Transformer Neural Network architecture; implementation of training loop; Trained and tested on book data pulled from Gutenberg

### Authors:
- **Evan Economou**
- **Joe Huston**
- **Nathan Hoehndorf**

## How to run the code:
1. Clone the repo.
2. From the following Google Drive link, download the pres_data and place it in the ./data/ directory, then download any pretrained models that you would like to use. https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1aZxdEda2bGkUnMhWXT0T9aDp7Uz-LRFx?usp=sharing
3. Run `uv sync` in the top level repo directory to create a virtual environment with all the correct dependencies installed, then activate the virtual environment.
4. Running `interface.py` with `python interface.py` (or similar, depending on OS/environment) will print a menu to the terminal with a few options, allowing you to load in a pretrained model, train a new model, or talk to an untrained model.

## Repo Layout
`interface.py`: Contains a main function that just handles the user I/O and invokes our other files. <br />
`transformer.py`: Contains the transformer class and all related classes, including our implementation of attention heads, transformer blocks, tokenzier, and an MLP. <br />
`helper_functions.py`: Most importantly contains our train_model function, but also includes various other pieces of code that were useful to abstract for readability or reusability. <br />
`json_to_txt.py`: Translates the many .json files used to store the president speech data into a single .txt file that can easily be used as training data for the model.<br />
`config.ini`: Contains all of the information needed to configure the model setup and the training process.<br />
`pyproject.toml`: Dependency information enabling `uv sync `<br />
`data/`: Contains all of the .txt data files used to train the transformer.<br />
`results.md`: Contains loss plots, example I/O, and analysis of the results.  

## Discussion of Design Decisions
Starting with about 20MB of presidential speeches, our dataset was 21619261 tokens in length after running word-level tokenization. This seemed to be enough data that the training process was able to get close to plateauing with the size of model we are using, but incremental improvement consistently occurred until the dataset ended so more data would definitely be useful. Our models all had about 1.1 million parameters, `using d_model = 32`, `d_hidden = 128`, and `num_blocks = 4`. This worked fairly well, producing text that seems more coherent than the gibberish created by the untrained model while not taking an unreasonable amount of time to train with the limited computing power we had.  

In terms of training length, it depended quite a bit on hardware. The exact times are given in `results.md` for the three models we trained. Generally we aimed for less than 30 minutes per training run through the data.

There are a few interesting design decisions made in our generate() function. We had a lot of issues with repeated words in outputs, especially with the untrained model. To fix this we initially tried adding a temperature parameter, flattening the logit distribution in an attempt to smooth out peaks and stop the randomly generated weights from getting stuck repeating the most likely word. We still were getting outputs that only consisted of a few words repeated in varying patterns, so we added a more strict generation requirement that the next token couldn't match the previous token. This increases generation time, but the outputs generally seem to more closely match what a user would expect as output, eliminating things like double commas or sequences of repeated generation of "the". To accomodate the increased generation time, we wanted to cut off the generation after a certain amount of time, not necessarily going to the max each time. To do this we just counted the number of periods generated by the model, and once it had created three sentences ended by a period we just end the generation.

### References
Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. "Presidential Speeches: Downloadable Data." Accessed March 1, 2026. data.millercenter.org. 
Vaswani, Ashish, et al.   
"Attention is all you need." Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
